    Title: Future of Racket
    Date: 2019-07-28T00:00:00Z
    Tags: Racket

For most of the last decade I've [made things in Racket] -- including
making [tools] and [tutorials] to support other people making things
in Racket.

[made things in Racket]: https://www.greghendershott.com/2014/09/written-in-racket.html
[tools]: https://www.racket-mode.com/
[tutorials]: https://www.greghendershott.com/fear-of-macros/

At RacketCon 2019, Aaron Turon gave the keynote about the Rust
community.

That afternoon, I had a talk about Racket Mode for Emacs.

The next morning?

<!-- more -->

Matthew Flatt gave his State of Racket talk. He said the community is
growing well. Next, he proposed, let's change the surface syntax away
from lispy s-expressions, to something that will be a lower barrier of
entry to new users.

He said it's just a proposal. It would probably take a couple years.
`#lang racket` programs would continue to work meanwhile and after the
change. But eventually, in his proposal, the Racket culture should use
this new syntax. ("Culture" meaning documentation, discussions, books,
tutorials, tools.)

To be fair, he gave people a lot of time to share their initial
reactions and answer their questions.

Also to be fair, if you have some mileage on your odometer, your
pattern-recognition machinery will quickly assign high probabilities
to various outcomes.

I'm concerned the change won't help grow the community; instead hurt
it. I've explained why in a few racket-users posts.[^posts] I won't
here. I don't think it matters. All you can say is, "Hey, that stove
is hot, you might not want to touch it."

I don't regret contributing things and trying to help the community
grow. I learned a lot! I had fun! On the other hand, if I'll no longer
learn or have fun? I'm not getting any younger. There are other things
to do.

In the near future, I'm spending more time with other programming
languages (currently Rust and Haskell). Possibly less time
programming, at all. We'll see.

Who cares? Why write this post?

- To have a background explanation I can simply link to from things
  like README files, as needed from time to time.

- Emotionally, I can't quite bring myself to say, "So Long and Thanks
  for All the Standard-Fish!" That feels too abrupt. But it's probably
  realistic about my current level of mental separation. So if there
  are a few people making plans, in part based on my own plans, I want
  to be up-front.

Finally, I sincerely wish all the best for the Racket core team and
the community, which in my experience consists of amazing people with
good intentions, open hearts, and sharp brains.

[^posts]: Update 2019-08-10: Now that some people are linking to this blog post? Here are links to my racket-users posts: [blah](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/racket-users/ewWuCvbe93k/s_P94KBmCAAJ), [blah](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/racket-users/ewWuCvbe93k/dEHdpFZnCAAJ), [blah](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/racket-users/ewWuCvbe93k/aiskVQd1CAAJ), [blah](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/racket-users/ewWuCvbe93k/WpIl8bsWCgAJ), and [blah](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/racket-users/vN_1uUJZnXo/5bXiMEBvCgAJ). Also I updated this to "linkify" some other things and add Haskell to the list of languages I'm mostly focusing on now.
