    Title: Roger Ebert, not engines
    Date: 2013-04-05T11:14:08
    Tags: technology

I've owned a couple TiVos over the years. The first thing I do on
setup? Turn off the suggestions.

The HBO series _Mind of the Married Man_ joked about this a decade
ago:
["My TiVo Thinks I'm Gay"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PoUJvAQg7KI).

<center><iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PoUJvAQg7KI?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></center>

Although I love NetFlix I also find their recommendations
underwhelming.

About the only film recommendations I ever find valuable are from a
friend or someone like
[Roger Ebert](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Ebert), who sadly
just passed away yesterday.

Why? Precisely because the recommendations aren't limited to what I
_already_ like.

<!-- more -->

This is the fundamental flaw with TiVo suggestions, NetFlix
recommendations,
[Facebook's fucking "Suggested Posts"](/2013/02/fucking-suggested-post-why-web-apps-matter.html),
Twitter promoted tweets, Amazon's
you-may-have-clicked-on-something-like-this, and so on.

The problem isn't the recommendation engines, even though they
[could and should be improved](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netflix_Prize).
The problem is the premise of the whole model: That I want more of the
same. That I want to live in a bubble.

I'm not claiming to be a special snowflake, floating above the
masses. I think _everyone_ wants some level of novelty. People may
differ in the amount and frequency of novelty. But for most mentally
healthy folks, not wanting to be bored out of our skulls is a fairly
basic need. Speaking of Roger Ebert, here is one of the many awesome
things he said:

> What I believe is that all clear-minded people should remain two
  things throughout their lifetimes: curious and teachable.

The other thing is, people go through phases. It may well be the case
that, for a month, I want to inhale everything related to a given
topic or genre. During that window, the recommendation engines might
be more helpful. Which is why it's worthwhile to improve them. Just
don't use them as the 24/7/365 model to predict what I'll like.

I've realized this is another reason why I'm disappointed about Google
giving the finger to Atom/RSS feeds. They seem to have the idea that
they can choose better than me, what I'll want to read. It appears
they want to join the giving-me-dubious-suggestions party. And they
want me to join the party, too--and want it so badly they're taking
away my LA privileges.

Supposedly "you are what you eat". You're also what you read and
watch. That's why I want feeds. I want to feed myself. I don't want to
live in Google's (or Facebook's or whomever's) Monsanto-inspired
monoculture. Not even in a supposedly "personalized" monoculture.

"Oh, but you can still visit whatever web site you wish." Yeah, but as
The Dead Kennedys said, give me convenience or give me death. The
point isn't possibility, it's feasibility. With limited time, feeds
are a way to keep up with a variety of sites. And although I don't
_hate_ typing or pasting URIs in the browser bar, I'm in the
minority. Plus even I don't want to type the URI when it means banging
glass on a mobile device.

So in a computing future where we're increasingly swiping and tappping
-- or
[glancing and blinking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Glass) --
the question matters more, not less. What's the source of this stuff?
Are we eating what we choose, or what's chosen for us using a model
with a flawed premise about who we are?
