    Title: Compare apples to oranges with the Nexus 4
    Date: 2013-02-05T07:00:00
    Tags: technology, Android

About a month ago I got my Nexus 4. My observations follow.

![Google Nexus 4](/img/google-nexus-4.png "Google Nexus 4")

<!-- more -->

# Pure Android experience

Most Android phones are adulterated with stuff added by the phone
hardware manufacturer and/or the mobile carrier.

The Nexus 4 is the pure Android experience as Google intended. This
lets you compare apples to oranges: the Platonic ideals of iOS
vs. Android.


Android 4.2 on Nexus 4 is polished and smooth. Although I haven't used
an iPhone, I'm pretty familiar with iOS from using an iPad. Both iOS6
and Android 4.2 are fast, mature mobile OSs.

My opinion? Android 4.2 is more [zazzy](http://youtu.be/mUy5NX0VmA4).

# Google Now

I took it on a 3-cities-in-1-week trip to the West Coast. Google Now
was surprisingly smart. I got "cards" about travel time to
appointments and airports, flights, nearby sightseeing and photo
opportunities, the local time back home, and so on. Pretty neat.

Although slightly creepy, it's using information I've already chosen
to give Gmail and Google Calendar, plus location information I
knowingly opted to share. I feel a little better knowing that Google
pioneered
[transparency reports](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/11/google-transparency-report-shows-rising-trend-government-surveillance).

# Logistics

There was a four week wait for my order to be fulfilled. In December
2012, nearly all of the devices on Google Play store had multi-week
waits or were "out of stock" entirely: Nexus 4, Nexus 7, both
Chromebooks, even accessories like the bumper for the Nexus 4.

Although this is a good problem to have, it is a problem. For the
first time, Google created a coherent, appealing set of hardware
products. It's generating excitement. And ... they can't fill
orders. I don't get the impression this is an intentional tactic
("scarcity makes people want it more"). Hopefully with more experience
and volume they will show more confidence, as well as command more
mindshare with their supply chain.
