    Title: Fucking "Suggested Post" (why web apps matter)
    Date: 2013-02-20T18:55:00
    Tags: software, technology


So [speaking of AdBlock](/2013/02/my-chrome-extensions.html),
sometimes I forget it's there.

I was using the Facebook app for iPad today. Which I hardly ever do. And I'm getting a lot of this in my feed:

![Suggested Post](/img/suggested-post.png)

And I'm all like:

![The fuck was that... the fuck is this?](/img/the-fuck-was-that-is-this.gif)

And I'm clicking "report spam" on each of the little fuckers. Tap, tap, please bugger off. Tap, tap, suck my balls and bugger off. And so on.

<!-- more -->

Later it dawns on me: It's because I'm using Facebook's iPad app.
Back in Chrome, the Facebook web app has been <i>trying</i> to show me
the <strike>little fuckers</strike> delightful suggested posts, but
AdBock has been quietly removing them.

The point? I can control this with a web app in a browser. I can use
extensions, take charge, and bend it to my will.  But with someone's
precious mobile app? They're in control.

I hope and believe the web app will gradually prevail on mobile, as
it's been doing on the laptop/desktop. How many of us check email with
web apps these days? Almost all of us. OK, sure, you there in the suit
still using Outlook; give your IT department a couple more years to
catch up, and that will change. Oh, and you there using gnus in Emacs
on a circa 2001 ThinkPad? I like how you roll, but you're the corner
case, and you already understand and agree with the spirit of what I'm
talking about: <b>Web apps are hackable</b>. Even if most people don't
know how to hack them, they know how to use extensions written by
people who do.

This is important.

Yes, yes, I know. "Only native apps can access ____ feature on the
device." That's temporary. That's because the phone OS makers are
unwilling or unable to let browser apps do this. So far.

I believe this will happen. I sure as hell <i>hope</i> it will. I'm
not eager to be dragged back into the equivalent of telemarketing
calls during dinner. And it's not just about annoyance. The
hackability of web apps is about empowering individual users with
special needs of all kinds.
