    Title: We need a prior art database
    Date: 2013-02-07T07:00:00
    Tags: patents, politics, software, technology

Last week I visited
[Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://www.eff.org/) in San
Francisco. Mark Cuban and Minecraft creator Markus Persson had
recently funded an additional staff attorney position,
[the "Mark Cuban Chair to Eliminate Stupid Patents"](https://www.eff.org/mention/eff-creates-mark-cuban-chair-eliminate-stupid-patents).

Considering this after I got home, I had an idea about an additional
angle from which to attack this problem.

What if there were a sort of "prior art database"? Where people could
submit and find information about first-use or discovery of
techniques--whether patented or not?

<!-- more -->

# Benefits:

Engineers/inventors have an alternative to the patent process. This
alternative allows them to receive recognition, which for many people
is the primary motivation. And although they would forgo licensing (or
trolling) revenue, there are other financial rewards that can result
from a demonstration of expertise.

Companies have a time- and cost-effective alternative to "defensive"
patents.

It's a helpful resource for contesting stupid patents.

# Implementation:

Instead of a database _per se_, probably this would work better as
something like a wiki or
[StackOverflow.com](http://stackoverflow.com/).


Perhaps Google could sponsor/spearhead, as they're presumably both
willing and able.

Perhaps the [USPTO](http://www.uspto.gov/) could sponsor/host. If
sufficient people chose this alternative, it could appreciably
decrease the application backlog and work overload.

Is the concept of "approval" needed? Maybe not. People could file an
electronic affidavit, or even just make a mere to-their-knowledge
statement.

If some form of approbation _were_ needed, it could be
crowd-sourced. Think of the voting and reputation system of
StackOverflow.com.

In fact, this seems like a natural evolution for Stack Exchange.

As I said above, this is not "the" answer. The patent system is
horribly dysfunctional, especially for software patents. The problem
needs attacking from multiple angles. Reforms like five year
expirations for software patents are needed and should be
implemented. In addition, I think some sort of go-to resource for
prior art could help.
