    Title: Ancient history
    Date: 2012-08-15T07:00:00
    Tags: life, nostalgia

I played trombone and piano in high school. I played electronic
keyboards (including a
[Moog Prodigy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moog_Prodigy), my first
synth) in a couple bands. I wasn't a very good musician but I enjoyed
it.

I went to [Oberlin College](http://www.oberlin.edu) 1982-1986. I did a
major in philosophy and a minor in religion. Although the Oberlin
Conservatory didn't offer a major in electronic or computer music back
then, I did a major's worth of those courses. I took just two computer
science courses: assembly language and Pascal. That turned out to be
good preparation for teaching myself C later.

<!-- more -->

In projects for computer music, I loved
[Turbo Pascal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turbo_Pascal). It's
remarkable that, all these years and MHz and GB later, virtually no
programming environment is faster.

![Compaq Portable](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c7/Compaq_portable.jpg/250px-Compaq_portable.jpg "Compaq Portable").

I used Turbo Pascal first on the school's
[Osborne](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osborne_Computer_Corporation)
[CP/M](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CP/M) PCs, and later on my own
[Compaq Portable](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compaq_portable) with
MS-DOS and a Plus Development
[Hard Card](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardcard). The latter let you
add a real hard disk drive, with a whopping 10 MB of capacity. (That's
not a typo: megabytes, not gigabytes.)

I graduated in 1986 and moved to Boston because some friends from
Oberlin were headed back there. I procrastinated getting a real job,
doing a little temp work. I decided to write a MIDI sequencer,
starting over this time in C.

Around April 1987 I decided to take out an ad in Electronic Musician
magazine and see if I could sell a few copies of the software, which
was called Cakewalk. (I named the "company" Twelve Tone Systems. Later
we renamed the company to Cakewalk, too.)

Where did the name Cakewalk come from? Just before the deadline for
the first ad, I discovered the original name ("Opus", if I recall
correctly) was already used. During a last-minute search through
Schirmer's dictionary of musical terms, I noticed "Cakewalk". I liked
the connotation of ease-of-use, which matched my goal for the
software. I liked that it was a simple, compound English word everyone
would know how to spell and pronounce.
