    Title: Blogging catch-up
    Date: 2014-12-05T20:00:00
    Tags: Hacker School

It's been a few weeks since I've blogged. Bad me. This is a catch-up
post.

Hacker School has a tool called [Blaggregator] created by Sasha Laundy.
We can submit feeds for our blogs. Blaggregator provides an aggregate
page, and puts new-post messages on Zulip, the chat tool.

[Blaggregator]: https://github.com/sursh/blaggregator

<!-- more -->

Awhile ago I noticed a bug with time zones in the RSS feed generated by
[Frog]. I was concerned that fixing the feed would change date-times,
and that _might_ cause Blaggregator to flood Zulip with "new post!"
notifications. Which would be embarrassing. So I unsubscribed my feed,
fixed the problem, and subscribed again. All went well, but Sasha
pinged me on Zulip today to follow up and make sure.

[Frog]: https://github.com/greghendershott/frog

That prompted me to check out Sasha's profile page and list of
projects. That led me to
[On Rakefiles and Rabbit Holes](http://blog.sashalaundy.com/blog/2013/03/25/on-rakefiles-and-rabbit-holes/).
This is such a classic Hacker School type of post -- where someone
takes the time to follow the trail wherever it leads, and learn cool
new things.

Sasha's mention of `stty -echo` reminded me of a mild annoyance in
Emacs' shell-mode. Sometimes -- but not always -- it starts echoing my
input, as if I had typed `stty echo`. Sasha's post this reminded me I
could type `stty -echo` to turn it off. But how and why does it turned
on in the first place? I searched and found a Stack Overflow question,
[Python in Emacs shell-mode turns on stty echo and breaks C-d](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/19246065/python-in-emacs-shell-mode-turns-on-stty-echo-and-breaks-c-d).

Aha. As it says:

> OS X ships with the BSD-licensed editline rather than the
> GPL-licensed readline, so this would explain why the behaviour is
> different on OS X from other Unixes. The same thing happens with
> other interactive interpreters. I find that the Lua, Ruby and
> Sqlite3 command-line interpreters also turn on terminal echo when
> run inside Emacs. So it seems to be some kind of "feature" of the
> editline library.

Yes. A fresh <kbd>M-x</kbd> `shell` is fine, until I run (say)
`python` or `racket`.

Anyway, Sasha's Zulip message managed to nudge me into writing a blog
post.

## So what _have_ I been up to?

My first six weeks here, I mostly spent multiple weeks at a time on
things like getting hands-on with Clojure and then Haskell, or pairing
a full week on a web service.

Whereas so far in the second half, I've been doing a variety of
smaller projects -- which I haven't blogged about one by one. Here's a
quick overview:

- Help some people who were pairing to create a lean web framework in
  Python. We got to see first-hand how cookies are a way to provide
  state for a multi-page form application.

- Work through the [Rust Guide] hands-on.

- Pair with someone working on a Python web app that shows you if it's
  Shabbat in the location of someone you want to call. They wanted to
  refactor the code to be less repetitive.

- Participate in Zach Allaun's hands-on workshop about configuring and
  developing using ClojureScript.

- Fix a bug in [racket-mode] on Windows.

- Pair with someone who is vastly more experienced in Haskell than me,
  to learn how to use Template Haskell for my Haskell port of wffi.

- Fix some issues with a couple of my Racket packages, [aws] and
  [http], that are now being used by Racket's DrDr continuous
  integration tool.

- Pair with someone who is getting started with Racket and wanted to
  use racket-mode on Emacs.

- Start to learn about microKanren from looking at [sokuza-kanren.scm]
  and a couple papers including
  [μKanren: A Minimal Functional Core for Relational Programming].

- Start to work through the [Matasano crypto challenges].[^1]

[Rust Guide]: http://doc.rust-lang.org/guide.html
[aws]: https://github.com/greghendershott/aws
[http]: https://github.com/greghendershott/http
[racket-mode]: https://github.com/greghendershott/racket-mode
[sokuza-kanren.scm]: http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/Scheme/sokuza-kanren.scm
[μKanren: A Minimal Functional Core for Relational Programming]: http://webyrd.net/scheme-2013/papers/HemannMuKanren2013.pdf
[Matasano crypto challenges]: http://cryptopals.com/

In most of these cases, I didn't feel like I had an entire interesting
blog post to write. I did take notes and had some fantastic
experiences both learning and teaching.

[^1]: All the friends and family who think I'm learning cracking here
at Hacker School? This is the closest I've come so far.
